Hey so welcome back over into guimpe.
And we are going to talk about the selection tools but what exactly is selection.
Well the selection tools themselves are designed to select regions on your active layer so whatever
layer we've currently got selected there is nothing at the moment.
We don't have an image so let's go ahead and just add that straight away.
Again 32 by 32.
And I'm going to zoom all the way in.
So anything is active on this layer.
We can select.
Now each of the tools have their own properties but they also share a number of options and features
in common much like all of the brush tools do the selection tools have a series of options that are
similar amongst them.
So once you've selected a particular region it allows you to work on that selected area without affecting
the rest of your image.
And that can be incredibly useful when you want to use some of the other tools maybe a gradient feel
or even just colouring something in you don't want to go over the edge so to speak you want to stay
within the virtual lines.
Now would you believe it.
There are a total of seven different selection tools and they are the first seven icons in the tool
box ranging from the rectangle select all all the way across to the foreground selector.
They can also be found under the Tools menu under selection tools and we can see there.
They've also all of them except foreground Select have a shortcut key associated with them as well.
Now in this particular lecture we're not going to do all seven Don't worry that will completely overwhelm
everyone including myself.
We are going to focus on the fuzzy select and the by colour select.
Now the other ones some of them won't be very good at all in this entire section because we're at such
a low resolution.
They're either going to be difficult or really don't have a suitable effect.
The intelligence is in the foreground select really need more pixels to work out what is part of the
foreground and background.
When you have just a low pixel count at 32 by 32 it's just not got enough information to do the separation.
The rectangle selects an ellipse select will visit very soon the free select again because we're at
such a low resolution.
It's actually quite difficult and time consuming to draw around each individual pixel.
So we're not going to use that in this section either.
So we are going to focus our efforts on Fuzzy and the buy colour selection.
Now the fuzzy select You may recognize there's a magic wand.
In other programs it enables us to select contiguous colour and that's based upon a threshold.
Now if that doesn't make any sense to you at the moment don't worry it will go through.
What that means in a moment.
So I'm going to select a brush size of eight and I do want a pencil for this just so it's a hard edged
tool and I'm going to create a couple of black marks on our canvas.
So there we go we have a smiley face.
Now what does a contiguous selection mean.
What it just means adjacent and continuous.
So in this particular case if we were to go and use the Fuzzy's Select Tool on either of these three
black blobs over the eyes or the mouth there we will see that it selects only the area that's connected.
It doesn't select the other to the by colour selects will select everything that is the same colour.
Now just like the fill tool that we've already played with these two options these two selection tools
have a threshold and it's currently set to 15.
If we wanted to be absolutes.
So the only things that were exactly black and next to each other were selected.
Then we could Tomer all the way down to zero or if we wanted to be a bit more loose and select more
of the surrounding image we could turn it up.
Now I found that these two tools in particular are quite useful when working with low pixel scenes like
the ones we're working on now if we have a look over at the tool options.
There is a mode and there are four options we can toggle between the first one.
Is replacing the current selection.
Now what this will do is as you select a new area of your image it would select what was previously
selected.
Now when we've got only two colours in our scene it's not going to make sense to use the by colour.
In this case demonstrate it but we can use the Fuzzy's Select Tool and select one of the eyes we see
the hashed or dashed edge around our particular selection.
If we want to use the next one along we can add other selections to it.
So we clicked that we can add the next guy.
And these are now both selected.
Now you can also use the shortcut key shift in order to enable additions.
Now we can hold down Shift and click the mouth and it's selected.
Now the next one along is subtraction.
So Whoops we've selected the mouthfull You've selected something incorrectly.
We can go ahead now and hold down control or indeed just select that particular icon and go through
and remove the eyes for instance.
Brilliant.
Now that we have the mouth selected what we can do is demonstrate that only the selection is affected
by another tool.
So we go ahead and let's say grab the fill tool I'll pick a different colour say red We can click and
it will fill only the mouth area and only the area that's selected.
If I was to click anywhere else it would not do anything.
Now that selection is persistent across multiple layers.
So if I go and create a new layer and call this mouth Watts We can then do is again with that layer
selected fill in that area and I'm just going to do it blue.
So it stands out.
And there it go.
And if we have a look just at that layer a by itself the mouth lay We can see that we've coloured in
an area that's completely separate using the outline of another drawing on another layer.
Now inverting the selection is something that's incredibly useful and I use a lot.
So so we're just working on this mouthfull layer here and we want the rest of the area now selected.
But our mouth the selected there is an option to invert it's under the select menu and we can see here
we've got invert and at the shortcut there is control and if we do that now the rest of our image is
selected and the mouth is not.
We can tell that even though it looks very similar that is because the border of the entire image now
has that dashed edge around.
If I go ahead and create a new layer again and I'm going to call this back ground cause now we've got
two layers called background but that's not a problem at the moment.
And I'm going to select let's say Green if I now click on that background we will see that it fills
everything in in the by the disable the mouse mouse mouth.
We will see that that area is now left completely clean and transparent.
Now that doesn't just work with the filter tool it works with every other tool as well so if I was to
go ahead and grab the pencil tool pick another colour are not going to go that bright pink.
And now you can see as I'm colouring in.
The area that's not selected is not affected by it at all.
Now there are a few other tool options.
Let's go have a look at those.
I'm going to go back to the fuzzy Select Tool and go to the tool options now anti-aliasing is one of
the options here.
This isn't going to really make that much difference at a low pixel count like the one we currently
have.
It's to do with making edges less jagged.
In this case is always going to be a jagged edge because we're working at such a small pixel level.
Will come across instances later on where this does matter whether it's turned on or off.
When you make the initial selection once we've made a selection if we go and change any of these options
it does not apply to the current selection we'd have to do a new selection for it to apply.
Now the feather edge is an interesting one.
I'm going to turn off anti-aliasing for the moment and turn on Feather edges.
It turns on a radius.
Now this has got a radius of 10 that might be too much.
Let's go over to the mouth layer and just have a look at what it will do.
Now we've got some tracks selected at the moment.
I'm going to go back to just replacing the current selection on the mode and I'm going to select our
mouth and we can see here that it's changed the shape of the selection.
It's brought it in slightly with a radius you probably guessed it of 10 pixels that should be roughly
20 pixels across which it does look like if I set that to something like five that entire area will
get selected.
But you can see it's not an exact selection it has feathered it in a radius around a sensor point.
And if we turn up a little maude's as let's say 50 and we'll see that a very small a much smaller area
has been selected.
Now I don't usually use the feather reges because I don't feel like I've got a lot of control over what
it's doing I understand what it's doing but it doesn't give me always the control that I want.
If you've got a rounded object however this is a perfect way of bringing different colour gradients
coming in.
For instance going to term feather edges off now select transparent areas as you probably guessed if
were on the mouth area and we go ahead and select it enables us to select the area that is transparent.
Otherwise we could not select an area with transparency.
And again this would be the same as having the mouth selected and inverting in this particular case
sample merged again very similar to the filter or you'll notice as we go through that some of the tool
options continue to repeat themselves.
Now if I was to go on and turn the background layer back on and have sample merge turned off and a different
layer other than the background layer selected I cannot select these eyes with sample merged turn on
essentially flattens the image.
So now I can select those eyes because it will select anything that's currently visible.
If I turn on the background layer it'll enable me to select this current green area at the top.
Now if I wanted the green area in the lower left to also be selected I could hold down Shift and select
it.
That's one way of doing it.
Alternatively I could have use the by colour selection and just selected the colour.
You see it's selected everything but the mouth there.
That's because it's selected the transparent area behind.
So let's make sure sample merged is turned on because we just changed the tool and click.
And here we go we select the entire green area at the top and the green area at the bottom.
Regardless of that they are actually being selected.
Now the final thing I'd like to cover before we get onto a challenge is moving your selection.
So let's go ahead and I'm going to just hide everything else I've done so far.
But the background layer and let's say I've gone ahead and selected this I can do that now.
Now once I've selected a particular set of pixels I can move that selection.
So with that I can hold down the old key and you'll notice on the cursor a little move icon appears
and it is little.
It's a four headed arrow and then I can move my selection to another location so I can create a nose.
That's exactly the same proportion.
And then grab another tool like the pencil tool and just colour that area in.
And wow we've covered quite a bit to do with the selection till now.
Let's go ahead and solidify that knowledge and apply it in a challenge.
Okay.
So your challenge for this lecture is to create forcillo where it's using the selection tools that we
view so far.
Now you can use existing images or if you want to really test your skills create some new ones some
new game icons and improve the silhouettes with detail and the end goal of this is going to be to make
a place holder like in an inventory where you have a weapon or ability that is not yet acquired in the
game.
An example for that might be a hint that there's a sword to be collected or a sword slot on your character
and it might look something along these lines.
Of course this artistic style is entirely down to yourself and how you approach it.
Go ahead.
Pause a video now and give that a go.
Okay guys.
Welcome back.
Let's go ahead and make a place holder for a weapon or ability that is not yet acquired.
Okay so we left off somewhere around our smiley face.
Let's go ahead now and create that inventory item.
I'm going to go ahead and create one from scratch because I need a sword that's a slightly different
size.
So let's go ahead and create a new image 32 by 32 that's absolutely fine I'm going to zoom in and I'm
gonna use all the tools we've learned so far.
But the first thing I'm going to start with is a pencil tool and I'm going to draw a rough outline.
Now I want my sword to start and end.
It doesn't matter if the colours.
In this case start and end with some space around it.
So I'm going to have the.
Handle is called a handle with a sword it's probably got a proper name but I'm not aware of.
I'm holding no shift in control here to snap it to 45 degrees and let's have the sword come out and
maybe here.
And the same cross here a line.
Yes this is all the way down and the same here so we can build up are our object very quickly in this
manner.
Now because we're focussed on making the sword as simple as possible.
I can go through in a moment some of these areas I'll be able to fill in others.
I will not.
So these are areas that have sort of white chequers in between.
I'm not going to be able to fill those in easily.
So I'm just going to do those manually but these larger areas of the blade I will be able to do that
some are going to grab the fill tool and fill those two areas in now other filter all has gone to something
I had previously and go to the foreground colour fill and fill that in.
Why is it not filling in fully.
Because the pastie is turned all the way down.
Love these mini challenges as they come up.
Okay so there's my sort of outline if you will and I create a new layer and I'm going to call it what
shall we call this bezel.
And I'm going to make myself a light border and then a dark border and it's just going to simply go
around the very edge of my image and create a lip if you will to frame the rest of our model.
Now I'm going to go round here.
I'm going to make it a bit darker those two colours are a little bit similar.
I don't think that's going to matter actually.
By the time we start filling it in with further details.
Okay so we've got a basic selection they're going to go back to the background and where's the selection
tool.
There we go.
I'm going to select that area there and using.
Let's use the airbrushed tool at this point point and I have a lighter colour and a larger brush that's
going to find a larger brush.
There again whole sets that should be enough.
To draw half of this a bit lighter.
Now there are other methods you could use to do that.
That's absolutely fine for me at the moment.
Now the final thing that I want to do is use the inversion for control and I.
Now all this white area is selected and I'm going to go back to the fill tool and turn down the capacity
again and use one of these patterns that I found.
Now be great initially to have a colour laid down so let's lay down a colour and then using the pattern
fill on top.
We can start adding a bit more detail.
Now I don't like how this sword is currently looking I think it's too dark on one side and matches the
border too much.
So I'm going to again go control and I need to flip the selection background.
I grab the airbrush tool again.
Very useful tool that and I am going to use a slightly different colour.
And let's pick there perhaps.
Again this is all a little bit of guesswork as well as a go.
And obviously you can fine tune these things as you go as well.
So that is coming together really well.
I'm liking how that's working.
Is there something else I could do to my image.
Now I could invert the selection again and I have a slightly darker border around the sword now.
So I don't destroy anything in a perhaps in in an ideal world I would have used more layers as it was.
But let's add a shadow layer and call it shadow.
Try to remember to name things as you go and name them appropriately especially just to get into a good
habit even if it is a throw away item it is very easy I do it myself am I forget to name things.
But then sometimes a throwaway item or what you think is a throw away item ends up not being.
So this is going to be a shadow layer so we need a dark colour.
And let's turn the value down search is just darker now because we're selected on the outside and this
inside area is not selected.
I can essentially go he says that it is currently selected only to invert that selection and try again.
There we go.
I can now add a shadow behind my sword.
Now I don't know if that's going to work at all or whether it's going to look incredibly messy it might
look messy.
So I'm going to select that using the pencil all this time and make a half shadow.
How does that look.
Sume in and out and just have a quick look.
You know what that looks rubbish.
Absolutely rubbish.
I don't like that idea.
So because it's on a separate layer this is the beauty of non-destructive workflow.
I can either just clear the liar and try a different approach or just go ahead and click delete and
it just goes and I can start afresh.
I'm going to leave mine like that for the moment I'm happy as that has an initial place holder.
How did you guys get on please share your place holders over on the discussions.
And I will see you guys in the next lecture.